.\"
.\" INTRODUCTION:
.\" 	This manpage for Aliencrypt was designed by Bombenheimer.
.\" 	Follow me on GitHub for more projects like these and collaborate.
.\"
.\" SOCIALS:
.\"	- GitHub: https://github.com/Bombenheimer/
.\"	- Linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/bruce-smith-4a4941296/
.\"	- Discord: https://discord.com/channels/@arrgs8
.\"	- Spotify: https://open.spotify.com/user/31i7hr5eqfinn6ricygtgsywuthu?si=6150908ac8814b04
.\"
.Os
.TH "ALIENCRYPT" "8" "April 26, 2024" "Aliencrypt 3.0.3" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH "NAME"
\fBaliencrypt\fR
\-"swiss army knife" to handle files
.\"
.\" SYNOPSIS OF ARGUMENTS
.\"
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PD 0
.HP 9n
\fBsudo alien\fR
[\fB--encrypt\fR]
[\fB--decrypt\fR]
[\fB--show-files\fR]
[\fB--show-file-types\fR]
[\fB--remove-exif\fR]
.br
.HP 9n
[\fB--shred\fR]
[\fB--logo\fR]
[\fB--color=\fR\fI1234567\fR]
[\fB--path=\fR\fIpath_to_dir\fR]
[\fB--key=\fR\fIkey_path\fR]
[\fB--help\fR]
.PD
.\"
.\" DESCRIPTION OF ARGUMENTS
.\"
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Aliencrypt allows a user to perform various file operations on files and directories as a superuser.
This means that a system using this tool needs to have a strong security policy to specify authorized sudoers 
to keep unauthorized users from executing commands that could damage the system.
.PP
The options are as follows:
.TP 8n
\fB--encrypt\fR
This argument encrypts a file or direcory chosen by
\fB--path=\fR
or the current directory of the user if no path is provided.
This argument will also generate a decryption key in the event that the user would like to decrypt the file or files at a later time.
.TP 8n
\fB--decrypt\fR
This argument will decrypt a file or files with the path to the decryption key provided in the
\fB--key=\fR
argument.
.TP 8n
\fB--show-files\fR
This argument will show file information about a file or files in a directory including permissions, filename, and file size.
.TP 8n
\fB--show-file-types\fR
This argument will show the number of each type of file is in a directory or of a single file.
Types include archive, audio, cad, document, ebook, font, image, presentation, spreadsheet, vector, video,
programming / script, binary / executable, configuration, temporary, metadata, backup, database, and log files.
.TP 8n
\fB--remove-exif\fR
This argument will remove a file or files in a directory's exif metadata.
.TP 8n
\fB--shred\fR
.br
This argument will overwrite files with random data and delete them from the filesystem to make them difficult to recover.
.TP 8n
\fB--logo\fR
.br
This argument will show the
\fBAliencrypt\fR
logo.
.TP 8n
\fB--color=\fR\fI1234567\fR
This argument will pick one of the 7 colors available, including 1 (Holiday Season), 2 (Cyberpunk), 3 (Frozen Dark),
4 (Protanopia), 5 (Deuteranopia), 6 (Tritanopia), and 7 (Greyscale).
.TP 8n
\fB--path=\fR\fIpath_to_dir\fR
This argument will choose a path to a directory or file to perform operations if the user does not want to perform 
operations in the current directory.
This argument can also be used with the wildcard operator (*) to only perform operations on files that match a pattern
.TP 8n
\fB--key=\fR\fIkey_path\fR
This argument will will be used as the path to the decryption key when used with the
\fB--decrypt\fR
option.
.TP 8n
\fB--help\fR
.br
This argument will show the help option.
.TP 8n
\fB--version\fR
.br
This argument will show the program version number.
.\"
.\" DESCRIPTION OF EXIT STATUS
.\"
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
If the execution of the command is a success, it will return a value of 0.
Otherwise, a value of 1 will be returned meaning there was an error, or a 2 meaning that a file or directory was not found.
.\"
.\" EXAMPLES OF PROGRAM USAGE
.\"
.SH "EXAMPLES"
The following examples assume a properly configured security policy.
.PP
To encrypt a directory of files:
.nf
.sp
.RS 4n
$ sudo alien --encrypt --path=/home/username/Documents/testdir
.RE
.fi
.PP
To show types of all files in the current directory:
.nf
.sp
.RS 4n
$ sudo alien --show-file-types
.RE
.fi
.PP
To show files and file information in cyberpunk color palette:
.nf
.sp
.RS 4n
$ sudo alien --show-files --color=2
.RE
.fi
.PP
To overwrite and delete a single file:
.nf
.sp
.RS 4n
$ sudo alien --shred --path=/home/username/Documents/testdir/example.txt
.RE
.fi
.PP
To decrypt a directory of files:
.nf
.sp
.RS 4n
$ sudo alien --decrypt --key=/home/username/Documents/KEY-00000000.key --path=/home/username/Documents/testdir/example.txt
.RE
.fi
.PP
To show files that are text files with the wildcard operator:
.nf
.sp
.RS 4n
$ sudo alien --show-files --path=/home/username/Documents/testdir/*.txt
.RE
.fi
.PP
.\"
.\" EXPLANATION OF ERRORS
.\"
.SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
Error messages produced by
\fBaliencrypt\fR
include:
.TP 6n
\fRThe program must be ran with sudo or as root.\fR
By default,
\fBaliencrypt\fR
does not run if the user running it does not have sudo privliges.
This avoids tampering with files by unauthorized users.
To avoid this, make sure that only authorized users are able to use aliencrypt or contact your local system administartor.
.TP 6n
\fRLibsodium initialzation failed.\fR
This error will occur if Libsodium did not initialize correctly.
.TP 6n
\fRColor does not exist.\fR
This error will occur if the user running the program chooses a color with
\fB--color=\fR
but the color they entered was an invalid color or the color does not exist.
To avoid this, the only valid colors are
1 (Holiday Season),
2 (Cyberpunk),
3 (Frozen Dark),
4 (Protanopia),
5 (Deuteranopia),
6 (Tritanopia),
and 7 (Greyscale).
.TP 6n
\fRInvalid path argument.\fR
This error will occur if the user running the program chooses a path with
\fB--path=\fR
but they did not enter the argument correctly, such as not including a slash
\fB(/)\fR
in the path argument or not entering it correctly like this:
\fB--path= /home/username/Documents/testdir\fR.
To avoid this, make sure the path argument is typed correctly in the path argument.
.TP 6n
\fRIllegal argument.\fR
This error will occur if the user running the program gives an invalid argument that is not one of the aformentioned above.
To avoid this, make sure you are giving valid command-line arguments only.
.TP 6n
\fRNo arguments provided.\fR
By default, aliencrypt will
\fBALWAYS\fR
expect command-line arguments that are either
\fB--encrypt\fR,
\fB--decrypt\fR,
\fB--show-files\fR,
\fB--show-file-types\fR,
\fB--remove-exif\fR,
\fB--logo\fR,
\fB--shred\fR,
\fB--color=\fR,
\fB--path=\fR,
or
\fB--help\fR.
If none of these are provided, an error will be raised.
To avoid this, always make sure that you are running
\fBaliencrypt\fR
with arguments.
.TP 6n
\fRToo many arguments.\fR
Aliencrypt will raise an error if you give too many arguments in one execution.
To avoid this, make sure you are not giving too many arguments for the program to process.
.TP 6n
\fRUnknown Operating System.\fR
Aliencrypt only supports macOS and Linux for many of its operations.
To avaoid this, make sure you are using one of those operating systems to run Aliencrypt.
.TP 6n
\fRUnable to retrive memory, MEMFAIL.\fR
This error will occur if the program is not able retrive enougth memory for operations.
.TP 6n
\fRFile or Directory does not exist or cannot be accessed.\fR
This error will occur if you input a file or directory in the
\fB--path=\fR
argument that does not exist.
To avoid this, ensure that you are only giving valid and correct arguments in the
\fB--path=\fR
option
.TP 6n
\fRKey file does not exist.\fR
This error will occur if you give a
\fB--key=\fR
argument but the path to the key file does not exist.
To avoid this, ensure you are giving correct and valid key paths.
.TP 6n
\fRInvalid key argument.\fR
This error will occur when you give an incorrect key path argument.
(See Invalid path error)
.TP 6n
\fRNo key argument provided.\fR
This error will occur when you do not provide a path to the key file with the
\fB--decrypt\fR argument. To avoid this, ensure you are using both arguments
.TP 6n
\fRThe directory you have entered is a sensitive directory\fR
This error will occur when you give a path to a diretory that commonly contains sensitive files.
By default, aliencrypt will not let you perform any operations that manipulate files but will allow you to use the arguments
\fB--show-files\fR
and
\fB--show-file-types\fR.
.PP
The list of sensitive directories for Linux are:
.nf
.sp
.RS 4n
/etc 
/bin
/lib
/boot
/root
/var
/sys
/proc
/sbin
/usr/sbin
and /usr/bin
.RE
.fi
.PP
The list of sensitive directories for MacOS are:
.nf
.sp
.RS 4n
/System
/usr
/bin
/Library
/Applications
/private
/var
and /sbin
.RE
.fi
.PP
.\"
.\" COMMON ISSUES
.\"
.SH "CAVEATS"
When providing a path to a directory or file and the path has a space in the directory name, you will recive undefined behavior
in which aliencrypt thinks that the path name is an illegal argument, such as this:
.nf
.sp
.RS 4n
$ sudo alien --show-files --path=/home/username/Documents/Seperated dir
.RE
.fi
.PP
To prevent this, make sure that the
\fBpath\fR
argument is in quotes so that aliencrypt interprets this as an entire argument, such as this:
.nf
.sp
.RS 4n
$ sudo alien --show-files "--path=/home/username/Documents/Seperated dir"
.RE
.fi
.PP
.\"
.\" SIMILAR COMMANDS
.\"
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ls(1),
shred(1),
sudo(8)
.\"
.\" CHANGELOG OF PROGRAM
.\"
.SH "HISTORY"
Aliencrypt is currently at version 3.0.3.
For extensive history information, see the CHANGELOG.md file or check the GitHub repo.
.\"
.\" PROGRAM AUTHORS
.\"
.SH "AUTHORS"
This program was created and maintained by Bombenheimer.
.\"
.\" REPORT BUGS
.\"
.SH "BUGS"
Bugs are tracked in GitHub. You can report issues at 
\fBhttps://github.com/bombenheimer/aliencrypt/issues\fR
.\"
.\" COPYRIGHT DESCRIPTION
.\"
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
Aliencrypt is distributed under the terms of the MIT License.
Aliencrypt also includes external libraries that are also under other licenses as well.
See the LICENSE file or visit https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT for more details.
